content/blog/humanitarian101/index.md, before:

+++
date = '2025-09-30T13:55:57+01:00'
author = "Stella S.T. Wong"
title = 'Humanitarian 101: Accessible resources on IHL + humanitarian standards + the connection with Business & Human Rights'
showFullContent = false
tags = ["Humanitarian_ response", "Intl_humanitarian_law", "SPHERE/CHS", "Business_HumanRights"]
draft = false
+++

With conflicts taking place every day not very far from home, I have decided to write this post to organise and share some essential resources on the *basics* of international humanitarian law, operational standards for humanitarian response, and relevant Business & Human Rights responsibilities. Most of them are free and accessible to the public.

# Core Humanitarian Standard (CHS) on Quality and Accountability

**The Core Humanitarian Standard on Quality and Accountability (CHS)** ([web](https://www.corehumanitarianstandard.org/)) is a widely recognised standard governing humanitarian action, published by the CHS Alliance, Group URD and Sphere Association. The CHS (updated in 2024) outlines nine commitments and core elements of an accountable and quality humanitarian response. It should be used in conjunction with **[the Sphere Handbook](https://spherestandards.org/handbook-2018/)** (2018).

{{< figure
  src="CoreHumanitarianStandard-EN.png"
  alt="The Core Humanitarian Standard (2024)"
  caption="The Core Humanitarian Standard 2024 (Source: [CHS Website](https://www.corehumanitarianstandard.org/the-standard))"
  attr=""
  attrlink=""
  class="post_image"
>}}

Under each commitment, there are detailed requirements. The full text (available in various languagues) can be accessed [here](https://www.corehumanitarianstandard.org/languages).

### Training resources
+ [short online course "Introduction to the CHS (2024)"](https://kayaconnect.org/course/view.php?id=11672) offered by *Kaya* (a platform for learning about humanitarian topics)

# SPHERE Handbook (2018 edition)

I mentioned the Sphere Handbook ([interactive version](https://handbook.spherestandards.org/en/sphere/#ch001)) above. It is a comprehensive handbook for humanitarian action. It comprises **the Humanitarian Charter**, **the Protection Principles** and **minimum humanitarian standards** (note the Core Humanitarian Standard 2024). It covers four important areas of humanitarian response:
+ water supply, sanitation and hygiene promotion (WASH)
+ food security and nutrition
+ shelter and settlement
+ health

### Training resources
+ [online training courses on the Sphere Handbook](https://get.disasterready.org/sphere-handbook-humanitarian-charter/) offered by *disasterready.org*
+ [short online course "Sphere in Practice"](https://kayaconnect.org/course/view.php?id=3387) offered by *Kaya* 

# International Humanitarian Law (IHL)

I have studied international law before, both at undergraduate and post-graduate levels. International humanitarian law, alongside human rights law, is always something interesting to me.

+ IHL is **jus in bello**, also known as the law of war or armed conflict (cf. jus ad bellum).
+ It's a set of rules that aims to **limit the effects of armed conflict**.
+ It applies regardless of the reason or justification for resorting to armed conflict or war.
+ The sources of IHL include treaty law and customary law.
+ The main IHL treaties include (but are not limited to) the **four Geneva Conventions of 1949** and the two **Additional Protocols of 1977**, together containing almost 600 articles.
+ ICRC's 2005 study also identified **161 rules of customary IHL** ([Full text](https://www.icrc.org/sites/default/files/external/doc/en/assets/files/other/customary-international-humanitarian-law-i-icrc-eng.pdf)).

### Resources on IHL: databases and introdutory training

+ *The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)*'s website provides a wealth of resources and information, particularly the [IHL Databases](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/). ICRC have also rolled out a cool **mobile app** ([web](https://www.icrc.org/en/document/ihl-digital-app)), on which you can easily find the relevant treaties and documents relating to IHL.
+ *Kaya* (a platform for learning about humanitarian topics) offers a **free online course**: ["Introduction to International Humanitarian Law (IHL)"](https://kayaconnect.org/course/view.php?id=1284).
+ *Leiden University* also offers a slightly more advanced **online course** titled ["International Humanitarian Law in Theory and Practice"](https://www.coursera.org/learn/international-humanitarian-law) on Coursera (note: it's a paid course).

[Hidden comment:
    + main IHL treaties: four Geneva Conventions of 1949 + Additional Protocols of 1979 (containing almost 600 articles)
    + Protection of persons
        + 1949 The First Geneva Convention 
            + Protects **wounded and sick soldiers** during **war on land**
            + Provides protection for medical and religious personnel, medical units and medical transports
            + Grants formal recognition to the protective emblems of the red cross and red crescent
        + 1949 The Second Geneva Convention
            + Protects **wounded, sick and shipwrecked soldiers** during **war at sea**
            + Provides protection for religious, medical and hospital personnel working in a naval context, as well as for hospital ships, coastal rescue craft, medical aircraft and other medical transports at sea
            + Recognizes the protective emblems of the red cross and red crescent
        + 1949 The Third Geneva Convention
            + Defines the status of **prisoners of war**
            + Develops the conditions of their detention, including with regard to places of detention, labour, financial resources, relief, judicial proceedings, release and repatriation
        + 1949 The Fourth Geneva Convention
            + Provides some protection for the general **civilian** population
            + Defines the status of **“protected civilian”** and the extended protection they shall be afforded
            + Develops the rules applicable during **occupation**
    + Protection of cultural property
        + 1954 Hague Convention on Cultural Property
    + International and non-international armed conflicts
        + 1977 Additional Protocol I on International Armed Conflicts (IAC)
            + plus additional rules re. prisoners of war
        + 1977 Additional Protocol II on Non-International Armed Conflicts (NIAC)
    + Nuclear weapons
        + 2017 Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
    Customary IHL
    + 2 elements: (1) sufficiently widespread, representative and consistent **state practice** (accepted it as law and relied on it); and (2) **opinio juris** (a belief that there's a legal obligation)
    + 161 core rules of customary IHL (year 2005)
]: # 

# Nexus between conflict, human rights and the role/responsibility of business

The [United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights (UNGPs)](https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/documents/publications/guidingprinciplesbusinesshr_en.pdf) provide a normative framework that guides state duties and business responsibilities with respect to human rights.
 > The Commentary to Principle 12 of the UNGPs: *[I]n situations of armed conflict, enterprises should **respect the standards of international humanitarian law**.*
 
 > Principle 7 of the UNGPs: *Because **the risk of gross human rights abuses is heightened** in conflict-affected areas, States should help ensure that business enterprises operating in those contexts are not involved with such abuses, including by... **[e]nsuring that their current policies, legislation, regulations and enforcement measures are effective** in addressing the risk of business involvement in gross human rights abuses.*

### Resources

There are some specific guides and resources on business responsibilities in conflict-affected contexts:
+ *UN Working Group on Business and Human Rights (UNWG-BHR)* - report [Business, Human Rights and Conflict-Affected Regions: Towards Heightened Action](https://docs.un.org/en/A/75/212)
+ *UNWG-BHR and UNDP* - [Guide on Heightened Human Rights Due Diligence for Business in Conflict-Affected Contexts](https://www.undp.org/publications/heightened-human-rights-due-diligence-business-conflict-affected-contexts-guide)
+ *ICRC and the Geneva Centre for Security Sector Governance* - [Knowledge Hub for tools and guidance on security, human rights and business](https://www.securityhumanrightshub.org/)
+ *OECD* - [Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas](https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/2016/04/oecd-due-diligence-guidance-for-responsible-supply-chains-of-minerals-from-conflict-affected-and-high-risk-areas_g1g65996.html) 

# Other resources

+ training package ["Introduction to Disability-Inclusive Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene in Humanitarian Action"](https://www.hi-deutschland-projekte.de/lnob/training-package-for-disability-inclusive-wash/) developed by *Handicap International*

Commit message:

edited humanitarian post - added climate change content

content/blog/humanitarian101/index.md, after:

+++
date = '2025-09-30T13:55:57+01:00'
author = "Stella S.T. Wong"
title = 'Humanitarian 101: Accessible resources on IHL + humanitarian standards + links to climate change + Business & Human Rights'
showFullContent = false
tags = ["Humanitarian_ response", "Intl_humanitarian_law", "SPHERE/CHS", "climate_change", "Business_HumanRights"]
draft = false
+++

With conflicts taking place every day not very far from home, I have decided to write this post to organise and share some essential resources on the *basics* of international humanitarian law, operational standards for humanitarian response, and relevant Business & Human Rights responsibilities. Most of them are free and accessible to the public.

# Core Humanitarian Standard (CHS) on Quality and Accountability

**The Core Humanitarian Standard on Quality and Accountability (CHS)** ([web](https://www.corehumanitarianstandard.org/)) is a widely recognised standard governing humanitarian action, published by the CHS Alliance, Group URD and Sphere Association. The CHS (updated in 2024) outlines nine commitments and core elements of an accountable and quality humanitarian response. It should be used in conjunction with **[the Sphere Handbook](https://spherestandards.org/handbook-2018/)** (2018).

{{< figure
  src="CoreHumanitarianStandard-EN.png"
  alt="The Core Humanitarian Standard (2024)"
  caption="The Core Humanitarian Standard 2024 (Source: [CHS Website](https://www.corehumanitarianstandard.org/the-standard))"
  attr=""
  attrlink=""
  class="post_image"
>}}

Under each commitment, there are detailed requirements. The full text (available in various languagues) can be accessed [here](https://www.corehumanitarianstandard.org/languages).

### Training resources
+ [short online course "Introduction to the CHS (2024)"](https://kayaconnect.org/course/view.php?id=11672) offered by *Kaya* (a platform for learning about humanitarian topics)

# SPHERE Handbook (2018 edition)

I mentioned the Sphere Handbook ([interactive version](https://handbook.spherestandards.org/en/sphere/#ch001)) above. It is a comprehensive handbook for humanitarian action. It comprises **the Humanitarian Charter**, **the Protection Principles** and **minimum humanitarian standards** (note the Core Humanitarian Standard 2024). It covers four important areas of humanitarian response:
+ water supply, sanitation and hygiene promotion (WASH)
+ food security and nutrition
+ shelter and settlement
+ health

### Training resources
+ [online training courses on the Sphere Handbook](https://get.disasterready.org/sphere-handbook-humanitarian-charter/) offered by *disasterready.org*
+ [short online course "Sphere in Practice"](https://kayaconnect.org/course/view.php?id=3387) offered by *Kaya* 

# International Humanitarian Law (IHL)

I have studied international law before, both at undergraduate and post-graduate levels. International humanitarian law, alongside human rights law, is always something interesting to me.

+ IHL is **jus in bello**, also known as the law of war or armed conflict (cf. jus ad bellum).
+ It's a set of rules that aims to **limit the effects of armed conflict**.
+ It applies regardless of the reason or justification for resorting to armed conflict or war.
+ The sources of IHL include treaty law and customary law.
+ The main IHL treaties include (but are not limited to) the **four Geneva Conventions of 1949** and the two **Additional Protocols of 1977**, together containing almost 600 articles.
+ ICRC's 2005 study also identified **161 rules of customary IHL** ([Full text](https://www.icrc.org/sites/default/files/external/doc/en/assets/files/other/customary-international-humanitarian-law-i-icrc-eng.pdf)).

### Resources on IHL: databases and introdutory training

+ *The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)*'s website provides a wealth of resources and information, particularly the [IHL Databases](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/). ICRC have also rolled out a cool **mobile app** ([web](https://www.icrc.org/en/document/ihl-digital-app)), on which you can easily find the relevant treaties and documents relating to IHL.
+ *Kaya* (a platform for learning about humanitarian topics) offers a **free online course**: ["Introduction to International Humanitarian Law (IHL)"](https://kayaconnect.org/course/view.php?id=1284).
+ *Leiden University* also offers a slightly more advanced **online course** titled ["International Humanitarian Law in Theory and Practice"](https://www.coursera.org/learn/international-humanitarian-law) on Coursera (note: it's a paid course).

[Hidden comment:
    + main IHL treaties: four Geneva Conventions of 1949 + Additional Protocols of 1979 (containing almost 600 articles)
    + Protection of persons
        + 1949 The First Geneva Convention 
            + Protects **wounded and sick soldiers** during **war on land**
            + Provides protection for medical and religious personnel, medical units and medical transports
            + Grants formal recognition to the protective emblems of the red cross and red crescent
        + 1949 The Second Geneva Convention
            + Protects **wounded, sick and shipwrecked soldiers** during **war at sea**
            + Provides protection for religious, medical and hospital personnel working in a naval context, as well as for hospital ships, coastal rescue craft, medical aircraft and other medical transports at sea
            + Recognizes the protective emblems of the red cross and red crescent
        + 1949 The Third Geneva Convention
            + Defines the status of **prisoners of war**
            + Develops the conditions of their detention, including with regard to places of detention, labour, financial resources, relief, judicial proceedings, release and repatriation
        + 1949 The Fourth Geneva Convention
            + Provides some protection for the general **civilian** population
            + Defines the status of **“protected civilian”** and the extended protection they shall be afforded
            + Develops the rules applicable during **occupation**
    + Protection of cultural property
        + 1954 Hague Convention on Cultural Property
    + International and non-international armed conflicts
        + 1977 Additional Protocol I on International Armed Conflicts (IAC)
            + plus additional rules re. prisoners of war
        + 1977 Additional Protocol II on Non-International Armed Conflicts (NIAC)
    + Nuclear weapons
        + 2017 Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
    Customary IHL
    + 2 elements: (1) sufficiently widespread, representative and consistent **state practice** (accepted it as law and relied on it); and (2) **opinio juris** (a belief that there's a legal obligation)
    + 161 core rules of customary IHL (year 2005)
]: # 

# Intersection of humanitarian action and the climate crisis

As the climate crisis worsens, the risks and impacts of extreme weather events on people and local communities are increasing, particularly for [vulnerable groups](https://www.taylorfrancis.com/chapters/oa-edit/10.4324/9781003190516-13/consequences-climate-change-vulnerable-populations-richa-sharma-srikanth). This poses more challenges for humanitarian action, from supporting locally led adaptation and disaster risk reduction to building community resilience. Taking climate considerations into account in humanitarian action is now more crucial than ever.

The [Climate and Environment Charter for Humanitarian Organisations](https://www.climate-charter.org/) is an initiative launched in 2021 that aims to provide a framework of seven commitments to guide humanitarian organisations in the context of the climate crisis.

{{< figure
  src="ClimateCharter_humanitarian.png"
  alt="The Climate and Environment Charter for Humanitarian Organisations"
  caption="The Climate and Environment Charter for Humanitarian Organisations (Source: [The Climate Charter Website](https://www.climate-charter.org/))"
  attr=""
  attrlink=""
  class="post_image"
>}}

### Resources

+ I’ve found some fascinating resources from the [*Red Cross Red Crescent Climate Centre*](https://www.climatecentre.org/), which is hosted by the Dutch Red Cross in The Hague. These include the [Climate Training Kit](https://ctk.climatecentre.org/training/introduction), which is accompanied by an [online course](https://www.climatecentre.org/training/) on the IFRC learning platform (registration required), as well as a [curriculum for young people and children](https://weadapt.org/knowledge-base/y-adapt/) through the Y-Adapt programme. There's also a [Climate Guide](https://www.climatecentre.org/wp-content/uploads/RCRC_climateguide.pdf) for those who prefer a written handbook.
+ The [Climate and Environment Charter for Humanitarian Organisations](https://www.climate-charter.org/), along with the relevant tools and [guidance](https://www.climate-charter.org/guidance/), covering topics ranging from [disaster risk reduction](https://www.climate-charter.org/guidance-themes/disaster-risk-reduction/) and [environmental sustainability](https://www.climate-charter.org/guidance-themes/environmental-sustainability/) to [nature- & ecosystem-based solutions](https://www.climate-charter.org/guidance-themes/nature-and-ecosystem-based-solutions/), as well as [indigenous & local knowledge](https://www.climate-charter.org/guidance-themes/indigenous-and-local-knowledge/).
+ 


# Nexus between conflict, human rights and the role/responsibility of business

The [United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights (UNGPs)](https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/documents/publications/guidingprinciplesbusinesshr_en.pdf) provide a normative framework that guides state duties and business responsibilities with respect to human rights.
 > The Commentary to Principle 12 of the UNGPs: *[I]n situations of armed conflict, enterprises should **respect the standards of international humanitarian law**.*
 
 > Principle 7 of the UNGPs: *Because **the risk of gross human rights abuses is heightened** in conflict-affected areas, States should help ensure that business enterprises operating in those contexts are not involved with such abuses, including by... **[e]nsuring that their current policies, legislation, regulations and enforcement measures are effective** in addressing the risk of business involvement in gross human rights abuses.*

### Resources

There are some specific guides and resources on business responsibilities in conflict-affected contexts:
+ *UN Working Group on Business and Human Rights (UNWG-BHR)* - report [Business, Human Rights and Conflict-Affected Regions: Towards Heightened Action](https://docs.un.org/en/A/75/212)
+ *UNWG-BHR and UNDP* - [Guide on Heightened Human Rights Due Diligence for Business in Conflict-Affected Contexts](https://www.undp.org/publications/heightened-human-rights-due-diligence-business-conflict-affected-contexts-guide)
+ *ICRC and the Geneva Centre for Security Sector Governance* - [Knowledge Hub for tools and guidance on security, human rights and business](https://www.securityhumanrightshub.org/)
+ *OECD* - [Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas](https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/2016/04/oecd-due-diligence-guidance-for-responsible-supply-chains-of-minerals-from-conflict-affected-and-high-risk-areas_g1g65996.html) 

# Other resources

+ training package ["Introduction to Disability-Inclusive Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene in Humanitarian Action"](https://www.hi-deutschland-projekte.de/lnob/training-package-for-disability-inclusive-wash/) developed by *Handicap International*
